There's that music again. Welcome back to Shiloh Creek, little ones — and if it's your first time by the water, settle in close beside me. The sun's going gold over the meadow, and I've got a feeling in my old bones that somebody's coming.
Let me ask you something. Did you ever miss somebody so much — so much — that you found yourself talking about them to a perfect stranger? Telling them all about your friends, just to keep them close while you were far away?
Well. The heart's a funny thing — it keeps the ones it loves close, even over the farthest hill, the way God made it to. I'm going to tell you about the evening one of our own came home from a long way off — and the surprise she carried in with her. The Bible's got a warm line about this very thing. We'll come to it by the water.
It was just then — right as the light went gold — that the tall grass by the path gave a rustle. And out of it stepped someone we hadn't seen in a long while. Fern the fawn — our own soft-eyed Fern, who'd gone off on a grand adventure back in the spring — taller now, and bright as the evening, and home at last.
I'm home! I'm home — I'm really, really home! Look at the water — look at the willow — it's all still HERE! Hello! Hello, everybody, it's ME!
FERN! FERN'S BACK! Everybody — everybody, it's FERN! Oh, I'm gonna hug you, I'm just — here it comes, big hug, I GOT this!
Wait — wait — FERN? You're back? You're BACK back? Okay I have nine questions, no, TWELVE — where did you GO, what did you SEE, did you bring me anything, and WHO is that human boy standing behind you?
She RETURNS! As I live and squawk — the wanderer is RESTORED to us! Sound the trumpets! Where ARE the trumpets? Old Timber, we simply MUST have trumpets for an occasion of this magnitude!
You kept my spot by the willow! You all KEPT it! I thought about this water every single day. Every day! And here you are — all of you — right where I left you!
Now, we just about knocked her over, all of us at once — bless our happy hearts. And the whole while, a little behind her, stood somebody none of the grown grass had quite let us see yet. A boy. A human boy, holding very still, and smiling.
Oh — and I didn't walk in alone! This kind boy found me on the road and walked me the last stretch home! Everybody, this is my new friend — this is —
JIGSTAR! And — FERN?! It's FERN — Fern's HOME!
JIGSTAR! You walked Fern HOME?! That's the best surprise ever — welcome home, you two!
...Wait. ...Wait — wait. You all KNOW Jigstar? He's — he's YOURS? I thought he was just a kind boy I met on the road! How do you all KNOW him?
Ha! Course they know me — I've visited the Creek before. I don't live here in the wood, but I know the way down. Came by after you'd already gone off adventuring, and they told me ALL about the fawn named Fern they were missing. So the second I met a deer going on about a bear named Bongo? I knew exactly who you had to be.
You KNEW? The whole road, you KNEW who I was, and you didn't SAY? You let me just — talk and talk about Bongo?
And give up the best surprise in the world? Not a chance! I just kept you pointed the right way and let you walk yourself home. Guess who's back, everybody! Small world, eh? The very smallest.
Well, now — did you ever hear such a thing? Fern goes off over the hills, missing us something fierce — and a friend of ours, who'd heard all about her, spots her on the road and walks her home. Knit together, the two of them, by the very friends they had in common. Mm. Isn't that something.
I found her near the top of the ridge, looking proper homesick. So I asked her — can I ask you something? — where's home? And she lit right up and started telling me. And she did NOT stop.
She named every one of you. A bear named Bongo who hugs too hard. A hummingbird named Zippy who builds things. And I knew exactly who you had to be — this is the Fern they keep missing. So I walked her the last stretch home, following her own stories right to the door.
I missed you. So I talked about you. The whole way. It's how I kept you with me.
Wait — you told a whole HUMAN about my contraptions? On the WAY home?? Okay that's the best thing anyone's ever done — hang on, which contraptions, please tell me you mentioned the snack-launcher.
She spoke of ME, surely. To the boy. On the road. ...Did she speak of me? You may tell me the truth, even if the truth is glorious.
I told him about the time you cried at a sunset, Garingo. For a whole hour. He LOVED that story.
...That is a BEAUTIFUL story. ...That is my finest hour. ...Thank you.
And YOU lot — you're all still here! Rex! Quilla! Chitter! Oh, I was scared somebody might've wandered off while I was gone — and here you ALL are!
FERN! We only had that one morning together before you left — and now you're back for good! This is a new favorite thing! I kept your slide warm! ...Okay I slid on it a bunch, but I kept it WARM!
Mm-hmm-hmmm. ...You came back, Fern. ...I hummed for you, the whole time. ...Here. ...A little smooth pebble — same as the day we met. ...It means, I'm glad you're home.
A pebble! Oh — Quilla — you have NO idea how perfect that is. Wait till you see what I brought home. And Chitter — you're STILL running everywhere, I can tell!
FERN! You're home! I ran three laps when I heard! I missed you so much! Do you want a tour of everything that changed? I can do a really FAST tour!
So there she stood, in the thick of all of them — every friend she'd been carrying in her heart, right here where she left them. A whole creek-full of love. Now — come sit by the water, Fern. Tell us where you went.
I went OVER the ridge! All the way over! I followed the creek to where it gets wide — and then WIDER — and then it just... opens up! Into water so big you can't see the other side! The wide water! It goes on forever!
Water you can't see the OTHER SIDE of?? ...That's not water. That's TOO MUCH water. ...How do you even — where does it STOP? ...Does it stop?
And I felt SO small! Like a little speck on the edge of it! But then — okay, look — I found THIS. Right at the edge, in the wet sand.
A stone! A little smooth stone — feel how ROUND it is! The big water did that. It rolled it and rolled it till there's not one sharp edge left. I carried it the whole way home for you all to feel.
It doesn't stop, Bongo. It joins. Little water runs downhill into bigger water, and bigger water keeps going — all the way down — till it reaches the wide water. Your creek's been part of something huge the whole time.
That's what I SAW! That's exactly it! Our tiny creek touches that giant water — they're CONNECTED! Isn't that the BIGGEST thing??
...Then our little creek was never small at all. ...The water's been carrying a thread between here and there, the whole time. ...Home doesn't sit apart from the big, wide world, Fern. ...It's joined to all of it.
Mm. Listen to wise Shelly. You went all the way to the wide water, child — and carried us with you the whole way, and brought a piece of it home. The ones you love come with you, even over the farthest ridge — that's the way God set it up. And the Bible's got a warm little line about that very feeling. We'll come to it, by and by.
Now, that put a quiet over all of us — the good kind. And one by one, the friends started telling Fern the little things they'd kept of her while she was gone.
I kept your spot by the willow. Nobody sat in it. Not once. I checked.
I kept the little bridge you liked — the wobbly one? I FIXED it. So it wouldn't be wobbly when you came back. ...It's a tiny bit wobbly. I left some wobble. For you.
...When you were gone, I kept a place for you. ...Here. ...Put your wide-water stone next to my cold-rock pebble. ...Two stones, from two far places. ...Now they're home together.
You kept my place. Every one of you. The whole time I was gone. ...You're the best part. Not the wide water. Not the stone. You.
See? This. THIS is what she lit up telling me about on the road. Now I see why. You're the home she kept talking about, the whole way.
Now — that warm line I promised you. It's from the Bible, from a letter called Philippians — written by a man named Paul, to his friends far away in a town called Philippi. He missed them, the way Fern missed us. Chapter one, verse three. It goes like this.
I thank my God upon every remembrance of you.
Now, remembrance is just an old, beautiful word for remembering. So Paul meant — when he remembered his friends, he thanked God for them. Fern remembered us over the farthest hill, and came home thankful. And we remembered her, and kept her place. God gave us hearts that hold the ones we love, even far apart. And being thankful for them is the gladdest part of all.
So, with the stones side by side and the light going soft, I asked the friends one quiet thing. Out of the whole big adventure — the ridge, the wide water, all of it — what's the best thing Fern brought home?
Ooh — me, me, I know this one! It's not the stone! It's not even the wide-water story — and I LOVE the wide-water story! It's that she carried us the whole way. She kept us in her heart over a whole ridge. ...The treasure was us. We were the treasure the WHOLE time. New favorite feeling.
He's right. I went all that way to find a treasure. ...And it was here the whole time. It was you.
Mm. Named best by the newest hearts at the creek and the one who just came home. You found it your own selves. Be thankful for the ones you remember, little ones — the friends who keep your place are the truest treasure there is. That's the honest gift of it.
And before we go — three frogs, one enormous question. The Mudpuppy Minutes.
Today on Mudpuppy Minutes — since Fern found the WIDE water — we will explain... where does our little creek GO? Where does all the water RUN off to?
EASY. The creek goes UP. It runs along, and then — WHOOSH — straight up into the sky, and that's where clouds come from. Clouds are just creek that got AWAY. The wide water? That's the sky that fell back DOWN. Boom. Science.
AND ALSO — no, wait. It doesn't go up. It goes DOWN. The creek runs downhill, and little creeks join big creeks, and big creeks all run down to the great big wide water at the bottom. It all joins up, going down. ...Huh. ...That actually makes sense.
...Wait. ...Splash. ...You're RIGHT. The creek runs downhill on the ground, all the way to the big water. ...That's — that's the real one.
Oh no — too sensible! Downhill? BORING. Take it back. ...Mudpuppies — we have solved it! The creek doesn't go anywhere. The wide water just SHOWS UP when it wants, because it's the BIGGEST puddle, and the biggest puddle wins, and that's why it's in charge. The end.
Splash had it. Downhill. Little joins big. That's the real one.
Mm. And he's right, little ones — the wide water doesn't just show up out of nowhere. Our creek runs downhill, joining bigger and bigger water till it reaches the great wide water — all connected, just like Fern found. Clouds and rain are their own true wonder for another day. As for those three? ...I'd let them keep their biggest puddle.
I'd best head home before the path gets dusky — my home's back up in the human world, but I know the way down now. Good adventure, Fern. Glad you came home. And next time the Creek's wondering about something big... maybe I'll come see what I can help light up.
The path stays open for you, Jigstar — guest-friend of the Creek, welcome whenever the water brings you near. And our Fern, home where she belongs, with a stone from the wide water and a heart full of all of you. I'd been hoping, quietly, that she'd find her way back. And here she is. So this is Old Timber — with a homecoming I'll be keeping a long while. Until the next breeze brings us together, my friends.
And little ones — wherever you go, however far? Carry your friends with you. Be thankful for the ones you remember. And know there's always a place kept for you, right here, by the water.
See you next time... somewhere in Shiloh Creek.